# Setting up the environment

Research in the humanities involves data, which is day by day increasing in size and complexity.
Along with the increase of data, also our needs as researchers increase. And the amount of knowledge that is taken for granted and implied each time we talk about how we process data.

Typically research questions require tools that do not - yet - exist. Or maybe there's a tool that does something quite like what we want, except we'd like it to use a different input or change that tiny step there. The tools should adapt to our research, not the other way round. Knowing how things work means being able to request specific modification, or modify tools ourselves. And, most importantly, it gives us access to a much wider array of tools.

Then comes the issue of durability and reproducibility. We need to be able to justify our process, to make it work again and in a different environment, and to use process released by other researchers, and build on top of it.

Lastly, there's teamwork.


## why should I know UNIX?

Why?
compatibility. If you find yourself on Fedora, you know what to do.

Tutto si può fare anche su windows, ma il livello di personalizzazione e controllo è diverso

contro: bisogna capirci qualcosa

SERVER - c'è unix perché non c'è interfaccia grafica, pesa, non è essenziale

open source - consapevolezza, eventualmente modificare, nell'IDE i passaggi sono nascosti.


## IDE

## plain text and file formats

## machine readable



## UNIX/LINUX


